The reason consumers are unhappy is fear
of inflation. What we learned in 2022,
consumer sentiment dropped, but they
kept spending. That's because people
basically hate inflation. Uh it's
unfair, uncertainty, feels like you're
not getting appropriately rewarded. They
just hate it. That doesn't mean they
stop spending. They're just unhappy
about it.
Welcome everyone. I'm Gjen Bannerjee and
this is a special bonus episode of WSJ's
Take on the Week. Today we are going to
dive into the question on everyone's
minds right now which is when will the
Federal Reserve cut interest rates. We
have the perfect person to chat with
today and that is Tom Barkin, president
of the Richmond Fed. Tom, thank you for
joining us today. I'm looking forward to
it. So, I want to dive right into the
news because my colleagues here at the
Wall Street Journal, Brian Schwarz and
Nick Timmeros, recently reported that
President Trump is considering
announcing and naming Fed Chair Powell's
successor as early as this summer. What
did you think of that? And what would
that mean for monetary policy if that
announcement were to be made sooner than
expected? Well, the first thing I
thought is I wish I didn't have to go to
the Wall Street Journal podcast and talk
about it. Now, um I I don't know what
the president will or won't do. Um you
know, I'll just say that uh you know,
we're in the business as the Federal
Reserve of, you know, trying to make the
best monetary policy we can. And
certainly my theory of the case is I'll
listen to anybody. And uh you know,
there's lots of people in the media and
in Wall Street who are have different
points of view on what we ought to do.
And you know, I like listening to folks.
Sometimes I learn, sometimes I have a
different point of view. and I'll uh
behave based on what I think is the best
thing for the economy and that's what I
I just always do. So, it seems like
we're at such an interesting moment for
the Fed where a lot of people want the
Fed to start trimming interest rates,
including our president. What would it
mean um for monetary policy in terms of
this announcement? Let's say if the
financial markets, if investors in
anticipation of a new Fed chair start
pricing that into say say the bond
market, what would that mean for
monetary policy? And how would you view
those clues from the financial markets?
Well, we do our best to telegraph what
we think we're going to do, you know, in
the world of high uncertainty that we
live in. Um, and financial markets uh
behave accordingly. It's not always the
case uh that financial markets are in
the same place that we are. If you look
at the last two or three years, in fact,
for most of the time, there's been a
meaningful divergence between the, you
know, average financial market forecast
and the median of the SEP. They tend to
converge in time. Uh, if you look at,
uh, the fall of 2023, the number of rate
cuts people projected for 2024 versus
what the median SP was, they were wildly
different. By the end of 2024, they were
about the same. So, you know, these
things uh, work their way over time. Um,
you know, I guess I'll just say, uh,
president will name a new Fed chair. I
mean, that's Jay's term ends, I think,
in May. Um, and so I don't think there's
a lot of news for the markets that
there's going to be another chair. We'll
we'll see um who he names and when he
names him, and uh we'll just uh do our
best to keep our eyes on the road. Yeah.
And to your point, yeah, investors have
kind of gotten this repeatedly wrong
over the past few years. Well, I I guess
I just come back to the fundamentals,
which is that economic forecasting is
really hard. And it's really hard
because it is the economy is huge and,
you know, multi-dnamic and people have
very different views on how things are
going to play out. It's hard because
exogenous factors always show up. Um,
and so, you know, I I I don't put that
much uh weight on people's forecast
three or six or 12 months from now. I
like to say, let the economy do its
business and then we'll the the right
policy will be pretty straightforward.
uh as we learn more about the economy
and that's worked very well for me.
Economic forecasting seems incredibly
hard. I'm thinking of the past few years
when it seemed like every investor I was
chatting with was banking on a recession
or thought that we would see a recession
and we kind of headed toward a soft
landing. Is it harder than usual right
now given everything going on?
I think it's always hard and um you know
I've just I've done this job for seven
and a half years. So uh during that
period we had you know the uh tax cuts
in 2017 and a lot of people had
forecasts about that and they' had the
tariffs in 2018 and 19. Um you had COVID
obviously you had an inflation surge you
had a big rate uh set of rate increases.
Um the one thing that is consistent
through that is people have been
predicting recession all the way through
right and if you predict it long enough
it will happen. I mean no one canceled
the business cycle so we'll see right
and then those people can claim victory
when and if it does happen. Well, an
interesting thing, an interesting
predictor is the yield curve. And people
say when the yield curve inverts, then
you're going to have a recession, right?
Um, and that's happened, I think, uh,
six of the seven times that the yield
curve has inverted, uh, you know, during
the last 40 or 50 years. What's
interesting is to go back and look at
those cases. So, like one of those cases
was COVID. You know, I'm not sure the
yield curve predicted a pandemic, but
you could argue that in one of them, it
happened three or four years afterwards.
I think that was in the 90s. I I just
say be careful of these sort of
indicators and predictors. In our
working lifetimes, the recessions we've
had have all come from left field. Uh
Lehman Brothers was left field. The
pandemic was left field. 911 was left
field. The Iraq war was left field. I
mean, maybe the Paul Vulker is the last
one that came because the Fed did
something. And so, there haven't been
that many recessions that have been
predicted by all these indicators.
They've all been they've all happened
and driven by things that weren't
predicted. And so again, you got to play
it out and see where it goes and then
make the best policy you can as
appropriate. So you've said you don't
think the Federal Reserve should be in a
rush to cut interest rates. Why is that?
So I've been describing today's economy
as like driving through fog. Um uh just
some examples. Um there's a tax bill
being um uh discussed, but no one
actually knows what's going to end up in
it and when it's going to pass. Um,
we've talked about uh tariffs, but I
don't know, maybe you know better than I
do, but I couldn't tell you what the
tariff rate on Europe is going to be six
months from now. Sure. Um, so there's a
lot of uncertainty out there. And when
you drive through fog, uh, and this is
true for the businesses I talked to, and
I'd say it's equally true for the Fed.
Um, you know, there are a couple things
you don't want to do. You don't want to
put your foot on the gas because if you
put your foot on the gas, you don't know
what lies around the next curve. You
don't want to put your foot on the brake
because you don't know, you know, who's
going to run into you. And so, you know,
often drivers in really dense fog pull
over and put on the hazards, wait it
out. Um, uh, that's what the businesses
I'm talking to are telling me. They're
not cutting back. They're not putting
their foot on the brake. They're not
laying a lot of people off, but they're
also not leaning in to things like
hiring, uh, and investment. They're just
waiting for the fog to clear and see
where we go. They're they're just
holding steady, right? And and, uh, you
know, for us, you know, I could describe
to you an environment that's going to be
inflationary, tariffs and the like. I
could describe for you an environment
that's going to be contractionary. I
could describe to you an environment
that's going to be neither of those two.
And I'm just not sure I'm in a rush to
decide and then, you know, wake up and
figure out that the fog lifted and we're
actually headed down a different road.
What does that mean for the economy? If
businesses are kind of just playing it
safe, holding steady, not making any big
decisions either way, if that's what
you're hearing from them, if it's a
short-term thing, it's not a big issue.
We'll get through it. But if that's true
for the long term, if people think that
volatility is elevated for the long
term, you know, that'll be a challenge
for hiring an investment. And I'm
curious like do you think there's a
shift between how consumers or do you
think there's a divergence between how
consumers are behaving and how
businesses are behaving right now
because what you're saying about kind of
holding steady, playing it safe. You
know, there's been a fall in consumer
confidence but not really a huge drop in
spending.
So, I've been looking at that hard and
certainly three months ago uh when you
saw the big increases in uh business
uncertainty, consumer uncertainty, but
what we're seeing on the business side
is what I described. On the consumer
side, spending continues. And so, I do
not hear that consumers are pulling
back. Again, they're not this is not
2022. It's not frothy, but uh consumers
continue to spend. And I've talked to
some of the biggest retailers and they
say very solid nominal consumption
growth year-over-year. Very solid. Um,
credit card spending, which I watch
every week, continues to be up
year-over-year.
And so, uh, despite what you see in the
sentiment, consumers are spending. And I
think the issue there is, uh, the link
between consumer sentiment measures and
consumer spending is not high when the
reason consumers are unhappy is fear of
inflation. What we learned in 2022,
consumer sentiment dropped, but they
kept spending. That's because people
basically hate inflation. uh it's
unfair, uncertainty, feels like you're
not getting appropriately rewarded. They
just hate it. That doesn't mean they
stop spending. They're just unhappy
about it. And with all this tariff news,
that's the same thing you hear from
consumers, which is my prices are going
to go up and I don't like it. Prices
haven't gone up yet, but they're worried
about the future and that's what they're
worried about. So, you pay more
attention to that hard data on spending
than the sentiment data. Um, I pay a lot
of attention to the hard data and
spending and then I uh spend a lot of
time doing deep interviews with uh
consumer products manufacturers and
retailers to understand what they're
seeing in terms of price elasticity and
and they're telling me they see it. They
see consumers trading down. Do you think
the link between sentiment and spending
is broken? I just think there's certain
types of sentiment that don't lead to
the same insight on spending. And when
you're in a high inflationary
environment, I think the sentiment
indicators just mean something
different. We're going to take a quick
break and when we get back, we'll dive
into tariffs.
[Music]
President Barkin, I have a hypothesis
that I would love to get your thoughts
on because I think consumer sentiment is
heavily influenced by Americans social
media use. I think social media can, you
know, drive a lot of FOMO. I think it
can make some people depressed and I
wonder if that's what's led to this
really dower sentiment we've seen the
past few years. Well, we are no question
we're in an always on media environment.
You know, my little metric is my phone.
Whenever I pick it up, I get 15
notifications on the news of the day.
And if the news of the day is tariffs,
it's tariff, tariff, tariff, tariff,
tariff. And I think people react to
that. And I believe that one of the
reasons you're seeing elevated inflation
expectations coming out of news about
tariffs is because of the omnipresence
of that kind of media communication. And
then think about it, the pandemic. Um it
was just going to be a cold on Tuesday
and then we shut the entire economy down
on Thursday. Think about inflation. Uh
when that hit in 2021 and 2022,
you couldn't escape it. it was in every
piece of social media, in every piece of
uh uh online that you saw. And I just
think that uh in today's environment,
the news travels faster and people get
convinced of stuff a whole lot faster
than they ever were before. And I think
that's playing a part in people's
expectations today and sentiment.
Absolutely. That's so interesting.
Yeah, it does make me wonder if that
that link is broken a little bit. Well,
so you always have to take these signals
and take a step back and say, you know,
what are we learning today versus, you
know, what you might have thought you
were learning. Um, it's the sunspot
theory. You can always look backwards
and say, see, when the sunspots came, it
turned into recession or when the AFC
team won a Super Bowl, that meant
something. But the past doesn't always
predict the future. And so, you do have
to think about whether the circumstances
have changed. And on consumer sentiment,
and it's linked to consumer spending,
that's where I see the change. So, let's
let's talk about tariffs.
A lot of investors I've been chatting
with have been surprised that we have
not seen the effects of higher tariffs
in some of the hard economic data yet.
When could we start to see that? I think
you'll start to see it this summer. Um,
two conversations I've had recently that
have really influenced me are with big
big national retailers. And I've asked
them, you know, what were your price
increases in May? And they said, oh,
basically flat, which is what we've seen
in the CPI. And I said, "Well, you know,
why aren't we seeing the impact of
tariffs on your prices?" And they said,
"Well, because the stuff we sold in May
is the stuff we bought in February, and
in February, we didn't have significant
tariffs, and we're not um dying to pass
on prices to a consumer who's exhausted
by price increases. We're trying to keep
prices low. We will pass it on, you
know, when the costs go up." But um the
cost really only went up for us, they'll
say, in April where they didn't take
that many goods because of the huge
tariffs on China and in May where now
they're taking 30% good price on China
and 10% everybody else. And so those May
costs, they're going to come through in
August. I talked to a different retailer
who said, "Oh yeah, we haven't raised
prices yet, but we're doing a reset in
August, and we're going to reset our
price labels right from one price to
another on a rolling basis through
August." So, it takes time for cost to
work its way through inventories to
prices. Three, four months is a pretty
reasonable way to think about it. um uh
manufacturers and retailers are doing
everything they can not to pass it on
because they're not dying to meet an
exhausted consumer. But, you know, it
will hit um in July and August and
September. Now,
just because someone raised prices
doesn't mean you see inflation because
you still got an exhausted consumer on
the other side who may or may not accept
those prices. And so what I've been
saying sort of uh snarkily is it's kind
of a cage match between a you know
emboldened retailer and an exhausted
consumer. And we'll see if those price
increases stick. And we'll see if they
do stick whether consumers take volume
out of other parts because there's no
new uh income coming into the consumer's
pocket to pay for it. And so the net of
that is whether we'll see inflation or
not. Fed Chair Powell um in his recent
postmeating press conference kind of
highlighted some of the complexity
around who pays for the tariffs, right?
Is it the consumer? Is it the
manufacturer, the importer? Who who
pays? There is a big chain and um it
depends on the product, it depends on um
where the your competitors source those
goods from. Is it the same country? Is
it different countries? Importantly, it
depends on what the tariff rates are
going to be because we don't even know
that at this point. U but some of it
will be caught in exchange rate
movement. Some of it caught in, you
know, manufacturers um eating it. Some
will be caught with wholesalers or
retailers. And some will go to the
consumer. I think that's all of the
above is true. Um and what you see right
now is an extended supply chain
negotiation between all of those
players. And that's part of the reason
why you haven't seen it show up in
prices yet because your retailer is
saying, "Well, we got to negotiate that
out. I'm not just taking it. Let's take
a month or two and work it out." That's
also part of what's happening. There
just seems to be so much uncertainty out
there, right, about tariffs. To your
point, maybe we see them this summer.
Maybe they take some time to go into
effect. And yet, when I look at, you
know, the stock market, it's near a
record. When I look at the bond market,
high yield bond spreads, not, you know,
these are some of the riskiest bonds out
there, they're not showing a lot of
concern out there about a recession,
about tariffs, about anything really.
What do you make of that? And is that a
signal that that you follow? If I really
understood the markets, I'd be in a
different profession. But um look, uh
you know, uh consumer spending is 70% of
the economy. And I guess I would just
focus you on the health of the consumer.
I've said they're exhausted about price
increases and they are. But they're
still spending. And the reason they're
still spending is consumers have jobs.
Unemployment's very low. Real wages have
been up, not down. I mean, you're seeing
comp increases in the 4% range and
inflation in the 2% range. And asset
values are still elevated. And so
wealthy people have money and they can
spend. And so you may not like that your
Diet Coke is more expensive, but you're
still spending money um on the things
you're spending money on. And as long as
that goes, it's going to be very
unlikely we're going to see a recession.
Um and so that's probably, you know,
what you're seeing in investors
perspectives. Now, that could change. It
could change, you know, as I suggested
earlier with something we in from left
field. uh and it could change uh if you
start seeing a round of layoffs that
then cycles into more unemployment and
therefore people cut back on spending. I
guess it could also the market side of
it, but all of those things could could
happen, but they haven't happened yet.
So, you think the US economy can
withstand higher tariffs and and won't
fall into a recession? Well, we had
higher tariffs in 2018 and 2019. The
economy was fine. They're higher today,
but we'll see how these things uh play
out. We'll also see how high they end up
being. I mean, like I said, the fog is
here. And um and anyone who tells you I
know what the tariff rate is going to be
on a particular country x months from
now, I think has got more confidence
than I do. I don't see anything in the
economy now that implies that it's uh
breaking or close to breaking. I I see
what you're saying. At the same time,
people who have been calling for a
recession the past few years have have
been wrong. And to your point, like it
is often this black swan event that no
one predicted. And right now, everyone
is predicting or everyone is worried
about tariffs causing a recession,
right? So maybe this isn't that black
swan event. But the latest jobs report
showed that unemployment was low, but
jobs growth is slowing. My colleagues at
the Wall Street Journal recently
reported that the unemployment rate
among recent college graduates is really
high. Consumer confidence has been
falling. Like what do you make of that
patchwork of data and and how does it
shape your view on the economy right
now? So, first of all, big picture, the
economy is very solid, and that's what
I've described in terms of strong
spending, low unemployment, inflation
coming down.
There's been a very wide and diverse
policy mix that's being injected on top
of that economy. We've talked about
tariffs. You mentioned, you know, less
immigration, which lowers the
denominator on the unemployment rate.
Um, there's a a bill going through
Congress that, you know, has a bunch of
stuff going in it. There's a
deregulatory focus by the
administration. energy prices are
another uncertainty that could go one
way or the other. And the question that
you try to figure out is this entire
policy mix, not any one part of it, but
the entire policy mix, how's that going
to end up? And that's then made more
complicated because I think you've got
um
uh the ability to change policy as we
saw with the tariffs in China to the
extent that it doesn't look like a a
policy that uh that you want to pursue.
And so there's a lot of uncertainty, but
I don't think anything's hit the economy
yet that feels like one of these shocks
from left field. I'm not saying it
couldn't hit. Of course, anything could
could happen. You just you mentioned
immigration. Well, job gains are coming
down. Um but they're still at 135,000 a
month, basically where they've been for
the last 12 months. Sure. Um and the
denominator is coming down because you
have by all accounts fewer people coming
into the country. And so you're not
growing the workforce as fast as you
were and job gains are steady. That's
not a breaking of the labor market. It's
just like a normal this is what happens
for your for your college graduates. I I
do think that's a real issue is that uh
it's harder and harder to get into the
workforce. Um a big part of that is
because companies are uncertain and
they've cut back on hiring. They're not
firing. They've just been through the
last shortage. They're not want to be
caught short, but on the margin they're
not hiring. And uh when you talk to
companies about deployment of AI and you
think about the jobs that they're most
likely to be experimenting with, it's
the stuff that a recent college graduate
does. And so AI is just an enabler of
them to reduce their hiring further. I
mean, is it telling us something bigger
though? Like how else do you think AI
changes or shifts our economy in coming
years? It'll create some jobs. It'll
eliminate some jobs. It'll enable some
jobs. Um I think all of that's the case.
Cyber security wasn't a profession 25
years ago. Now it's an enormous totally
profession and I don't know what the
equivalent job will be prompt writer you
know for AI but there will be jobs out
there that we haven't even thought of
today uh that will be relevant. What
would it take to clear this fog that you
mentioned?
Well, there's two ways this happens. One
is a lot more policy certainty. Um and
you know there are vehicles for that
policy certainty right in front of us.
uh tariffs there's a date coming up that
sure where we may see a lot more clarity
um tax bill there's a a date coming up
we may see a lot more clarity so I think
I think policy certainty that would be
one element of it the second element
would be or the second way is keep the
same kind of policy uncertainty but
businesses just decide they're not going
to wait anymore if you're a business who
just decides you're not going to wait
anymore it basically you're saying
volatility is going to be a permanent
feature of this and I'm just going to up
my effective discount rate and I'm going
to make the decisions on investments
ments or employment that I have to make
in a higher uncertainty environment and
we'll see. We are going to take one last
break and when we come back a final
question for Tom Barkin.
So given everything we've just discussed
about tariffs, the economy, you name it.
What do you need to see in order to
shift your stance on on cutting interest
rates? There are a lot of ways the
economy could evolve. Obviously, uh you
could end up with a higher inflation
environment that you convinced yourself
was more persistent. That would move you
move rates one way. Uh you could end up
with uh the employment market cracking,
you know, that would move rates the
other way. What would a crack look like?
No. And you start being very concerned
about what's going to happen to
employment, you know, over the coming,
you know, quarters. Um, and then, uh,
you could have a situation where, um,
you convince yourself that we're
actually not going to see that much
inflation and the labor market's pretty
solid. And that's your classic soft
landing scenario. And that would be a
third model. And I think if you look at
the SCP from the last meeting, you'll
see evidence of all of those models in
the various places, you know, my
colleagues and I put put our projected
rate pass. And I never sort of try to
overthink a meeting that's three months
away or six months away. Let's see where
the economy goes. And I think we're very
well positioned right now to react. If
you feel like you have to support the
employment side of the mandate, we're
well positioned to act. If you have to
support the inflation side of the
mandate, we're well positioned to act. I
I think we're just well positioned for
whatever comes. Thank you so much.
That's all for today and this has been
really great to have you on. Glad to do
it.
[Music]
Can you cut out my stupid answers too?
Or my stupid questions? Yeah. No, no,
you haven't asked it yet.
[Music]